---
layout: post
title: Week 9- Analysing paleontological data with PyRate
date:   2017-03-01
author: Gaurav Kandlikar
---

## Introduction to PyRate
Today in lab we will learn how to use [PyRate](https://github.com/dsilvestro/PyRate), a program that helps account for uncertainty in estimates of fossil species' origination and extinction dates. More in-depth discussion about the science of PyRate can be found [here](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/2041-210X.12263/abstract).

PyRate is written as a series of `python` and `R` code that take information that can be downloaded from the paleobiology database as inputs and returns biologically relevant estimates. The `python` code in PyRate requires Python 2.X (not Python 3, which we have been using), so our first step today will be to install and use Python 2 on our virtualbox.

## Setup
We have been using the Python package manager [Conda](), which makes switching between python environments quite straightforward. Run the following commands in terminal to install and switch to python 2.7:


```
# these can be done from any directory
conda update conda

# create a new environment named "py27" which uses Python version 2.7
conda create --name py27 python=2.7

# switch to your newly created environment
source activate py27

# verify that you have switched to py27
conda info --envs  # there should be a * on the py27 lines, and not on the "root" line
python --version # should output Python 2.7.13

# install numpy and scipy, which we had installed for py3 but are not available yet in py27 
conda install numpy
conda install scipy

```

Now every time you upen a new terminal, you will be on the **Root environment of Conda**, which uses Python 3. If you plan to be using PyRate in the terminal, you need to begin the session by switching into the python 2.7 environment using `source activate py27`!


#### Downloading PyRate

To download PyRate, we can simply `git clone` the whole program into our virutal boxes. We will place the program in our home directory:

```
# navigate to home directory
cd ~

# clone the pyrate repo from github
git clone https://github.com/dsilvestro/PyRate.git

# verify that everything is present:
cd PyRate
ls
```

The output from the last `ls` command in the `PyRate` directory should look like this:

```
example_files                      PyRateDES.py            pyrate_utilities.r
experimental_code                  pyrate_DES_utilities.R  README.md
PyRateContinuous.py                pyrate_lib              requirements.txt
PyRateContinuousShift.py           PyRateMCDD.py           tutorials
pyrate_DES_input_example_script.R  PyRate.py
```

## Let's use PyRate

With all the setup behind us, we are finally ready to use PyRate! Within your `lab-work` directory, create a new `exercise-9` directory. The remainder of this lab should be completed from within the `exercise-9` directory.

### Downloading data

Pyrate requires data from the PBDB that is downloaded according to the following specifications:

> Download fossil occurrences for a clade from the Paleobiology Database. E.g. search for the genus Canis and save it as a cvs file, e.g. using the file name Canis_pbdb_data.csv. Before downloading the file, check the box "Show accepted names only" in the "Select by taxonomy" section, and uncheck the box "Include fmetadata at the beginning of the output" in the "Choose output options" section.

Rather than making you do this separately from the web, we can simply navigate to the pbdb, enter the parameters listed above, and use `wget` to fetch the data from the download link created by pbdb. The following command fetches the data and uses the `-O` option of `wget` to save it in a new file called `canidae_occ.csv`:

```
wget -O canid_occ.csv "https://paleobiodb.org/data1.2/occs/list.csv?base_name=Canidae&show=acconly"
```

#### To Do
Before moving on, it is prudent to get a sense for what is happening in our freshly downloaded dataset. Use any of the shell commands you have learned so far to explore the contents of `canis_occ.csv`. Create a new `jupyter notebook` file, and in a markdown block write the answers to the following questions:

1. How many fossils are included in the dataset?  
2. How many fossils have been identified to genus-level only? How many to species-level?  
3. How many unique accepted names are part of this dataset?  

--------------

### Formatting data for PyRate  
Before we run the pyrate program, we need to rearrange the data into a format that PyRate accepts. Happily, the authors of PyRate have written an `R` script to do this rearranging for us. The `R` script is saved as `~/PyRate/pyrate_utilities.r`. Our task now is to write a second R script that in turn uses this R script on our datafile. To do this, open rstudio from the `exercise-9` directory and run the following commands:

```
source("~/PyRate/pyrate_utilities.r")

# we need to give the utilities a list of extant species
extant_dogs = c("Canis rufus","Canis lupus","Canis aureus","Canis latrans","Canis mesomelas","Canis anthus","Pseudalopex gymnocercus","Canis adustus","Canis familiaris")

# use the extract.ages.pbdb() function in pyrate_utilities to reformat our dataset...
extract.ages.pbdb(file= "canid_occ.csv",extant_species=extant_dogs)

# you should see the following output:

# "This function is currently being tested - caution with the results!"
# replicate 1
# PyRate input file was saved in:  ./canid_occ_PyRate.py 


# TO DO:
# save the file as "process_canid_data.R" in exercise-9

# quit rstudio
```

**NOTE**: PyRate allows for a lot more sophistication in this step to account for the uncertainty in dating estimates, but we are using a simpler approach in the class. For more information, please refer to the official [PyRate tutorial](https://github.com/dsilvestro/PyRate/blob/master/tutorials/pyrate_tutorial_1.md).

We should now be ready to run PyRate. Let's verify that our R script worked as expected. The `exercise-9` directory should contain three new files, named `canid_occ_PyRate.py`, canid_occ.txt`, and `canid_occ_TaxonList.txt`. Let's inspect the contents of the freshly created `canid_occ_PyRate.py`. Issue the following commands in the `exercise-9` directory in the terminal:

```
head canid_occ_PyRate.py
```

The output should look something like this:

```
#!/usr/bin/env python
from numpy import * 


data_1=[array([14.891492,14.265626,14.802215,12.955048,15.86654,13.165415,15.150284,14.42986,15.375599,14.463246,13.607118,5.39764,13.449093]),
array([18.754376,17.952686,15.336749,14.297858,14.342014,15.825685,14.766692,15.349627,14.59774,13.668734,15.245747]),
```

### Let's run PyRate!

We can finally start running PyRate. But before we do, it is good practice to read through the help-file associated with the program:

```
python ~/PyRate/PyRate.py --help
```

#### To Do
In the jupyter notebook you created above, please answer the following questions: 

1. How can we change the sampling frequency of our PyRate run?  
2. What does the `-n` flag achieve?  

--------

Before running the full program, which can take a very long time, it is good to verify that our input data file `canid_occ_PyRate.py` is formatted perfectly. We can ask PyRate to run through our data file and summarize the data using the following command:

```
python ~/PyRate/PyRate.py canid_occ_PyRate.py -data_info
```

The output should begin with these lines, followed by many rows of `Taxon 	FA	LA`:

```
The analysis includes 211 species (0 were excluded)
Using Gamma priors on the birth-death rates (G_l[1.1,1.1], G_m[1.1,1.1]).


DATA SUMMARY

211 species included in the data set
51 species have a single occurrence, 9 species are extant
2946 fossil occurrences (1 replicates), ranging from 55.004 (+/- 0.0) to 0.001 (+/- 0.0) Ma
...
```


We have verified that PyRate can read our data file and are ready to run the whole file. Woohoo! The following command will launch the PyRate analysis on our datafile for 250000 steps in the MCMC chain. **NOTE**: we would normally want many many more steps in the chain! We are restricting to 250000 here for sake of time only.

```
python ~/PyRate/PyRate.py Canis_raw_PyRate.py -n 250000
```

If all goes well, you should see output that looks like the following being printed out to the terminal screen:

```
1000	post: -5112.29 lik: -5102.1 (-3914.58, -1187.51) prior: -10.19 tot.l: 1336.7 k: 2
	t.frames: [ 57.571   0.   ] (sp.)
	t.frames: [ 57.571   0.   ] (ex.)
	sp.rates: [ 0.132]
	ex.rates: [ 0.149]
	q.rate: 2.186 	Gamma.prm: 1.0
	ts: [ 16.809  20.146  23.517  17.228  14.44 ] ...
	te: [  4.171  13.068   4.857  12.583  13.329] ...

```

This run will take a long time! During this time, please read through the [official PyRate tutorials] to get a better sense of all that we have achieved.  

------------

### Summarizing the output of PyRate

Once your PyRate run has completed, you should see several new files in the `exercise-9` directory. Within `exercise-9`, you shuold now see the file `canid_occ_PyRate.pyc` and the directory `pyrate_mcmc_logs`; within that directory, you should see `canid_occ_1_marginal_rates.log`, `canid_occ_1_mcmc.log`, and `canid_occ_1_sum.txt`. \

#### To Do:

In your jupyter notebook above, write a summary of what each of these three files in `pyrate_mcmc_logs` show. You can find explanations on the PyRate github page.  

------------


### Rates through time plots

One of the reasons to run PyRate is to get good estimates of diversification (i.e. speciation and extinction) rates of a lineage through time. PyRate comes with some utilities that help us plot these rates easily from the output log files. We can use `PyRate.py` with the -plot flag to generate a PDF file of these RTT (Rates Through Time) plots. Run the following command from within the `pyrate_mcmc_logs` directory:

```
python ~/PyRate/PyRate.py -plot canid_occ_1_marginal_rates.log
```

Running this command creates the `R` script `canid_occ_1_marginal_rates_RTT.r`, which is a script to plot the RTT plots into the file `canid_occ_1_marginal_rates_RTT.pdf`. Let's open this pdf file and look at the diversification rates:

```
see canid_occ_1_marginal_rates_RTT.pdf
```

---------

### Combining analysis steps into a shell script

Our full analysis is currently split up acorss a lot of different parts. If anyone else wants to repeat all of our analysis in exactly the same way, there'd be a lot of different steps we would need to share. A better alternative would be to write a shell script that recreates all of the steps in our analysis, from downloading the data to making RTT plots, in one go. Save the following shell script as `full-pyrate-run.sh` in a new directory called `shell-script-demo` under the `exercise-9` directory.  

```
#! /bin/bash

# Script to run full pyrate pipeline on Canidae

# navigate to the working directory
cd ~/Desktop/eeb-177/lab-work/exercise-9

# download the data
wget -O canid_occ.csv "https://paleobiodb.org/data1.2/occs/list.csv?base_name=Canidae&show=acconly"

# use the R script we had created to format the data into a pyrate-friendly file
# NOTE!
# if the output files from the R script already exist in the working directory, 
# THIS STEP WILL NOT WORK!
# The existent files are NOT overwritten!
Rscript process_canid_data.R

# Verify that the data formatting worked, and redirect the output into a file called 
# data_summary.txt so that it may be inspected later.
python ~/PyRate/PyRate.py canid_occ_PyRate.py -data_info > data_summary.txt

# And then, run PyRate!
python ~/PyRate/PyRate.py Canis_raw_PyRate.py -n 500000
```

We can now save this shell script in `shell-script-demo`. Before we can run the script, we need to **add permissions using `chmod`** Now, if we copy in `process_canid_data.R` into the `shell-script-demo` directory, we should be able to recreate our full analysis with a single command:

```
./full-pyrate-run.sh
```

## Homework

1. Open the RTT plots that you created during this exercise. In your Jupyter notebook, answer the following questions:  
a. Describe the changes in Speciation rates across the Canidae lineage.
b. Describe the changes in Extinction rates across the Canidae lineage.
c. Describe the changes in Diversification rates across the Canidae lineage.

2. Create a new directory within `exercise-9` called `longer-pyrate-run`.
3. Use the `wget` command to download the Canidae dataset into this new directory.
4. Complete all the steps necessary to run PyRate on the freshly downloaded dataset.
5. Run PyRate for 2500000 steps. NOTE: I expect this to take ~4 hours to run, so you may want to run it over night.
6. Create RTT plots for this new run. Do you see anything different about these RTT plots compared to the ones you had made with only 250000 steps in the MCMC chain?
7. Create a copy of the `full-pyrate-run.sh` in the `longer-pyrate-run` directory. Modify the shell script so that it takes in two input variables:
a) The link from which to download the raw data; 
b) The length of the PyRate run.

8. Commit and push everything in `longer-pyrate-run`, as well as your jupyter notebook from class, to github.







